# Engineering-Thesis
# SUMMARY
### engineering thesis by Gabriela Jarosz
### entitled „Air pollutants long-term variability analysis for selected world cities”
The topic of the thesis concerns air pollution by particulate matter PM_2.5 which causes most health problems for humans. The main purpose of the thesis was to analyse the long-term variability of air pollution in selected cities around the world.
The analyses were conducted for three cities - Delhi, Beijing and Helsinki. The cities differ in terms of area, population density, altitude and climate. Three sensors were selected for each city. The analysis of pollution variability is for three years: 2019, 2020 and 2021. It was decided to create a dashboard and an interactive map with the location of the measurement points in each city. It was created in R language, using RStudio and the shiny package. It was decided to perform descriptive statistics, Spearman correlation and partial autocorrelation. A time series analysis was also performed. The analyses were based on data from the World Air Quality Index project. The data from this source is free of charge and contains daily average air quality data. 
Analysis of descriptive statistics showed that in the centre as well as in the periphery, the highest variability of pollution occurred in the city of Delhi. The lowest pollution occurred in Helsinki. When analysing the average pollution in the cities, locations closer to the centre achieved higher pollution values. In the line graphs, it was noted that the increase in pollution values occurs during winter periods, which was best seen in Delhi and Beijing. The correlations between the values from the three selected sensors for each city showed that the highest correlation was achieved for Helsinki and the sensor on the outskirts of the city and the third selected sensor. The correlations between each of the analysed years indicated a very high correlation for Delhi and the years 2019 and 2020. Analysis of the graphs with seasonality showed that the maximum air pollution in Delhi was reached for December. For Beijing, the highest median value was indicated for January. In Delhi, was noted a trend between 2020 and 2021. In Beijing, seasonal variations were observed, with significant increases in pollution during the winter months. The air pollution analysis graph confirmed that the lowest pollution PM_2.5 is found in Helsinki, with Delhi being the most polluted.
After the analysis of air pollution, it can be concluded that the highest pollution was observed in Delhi, while the cleanest analysed city turned out to be Helsinki.
